Astronomy&Astrophysicsmanuscriptno.solar˙model˙v10˙corrected ©ESO2022
January4,2022
Local heating due to convective overshooting and the solar
modelling problem
I.Baraffe1,2,T.Constantino1,J.Clarke1,A.LeSaux1,2,T.Goffrey4,T.Guillet1,J.Pratt3,D.G.Vlaykov1
1 UniversityofExeter,PhysicsandAstronomy,EX44QLExeter,UK(e-mail:i.baraffe@ex.ac.uk)
2 ´ EcoleNormaleSup´ erieure,Lyon,CRAL(UMRCNRS5574),Universit´ edeLyon,France
3 DepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,GeorgiaStateUniversity,AtlantaGA30303,USA
4 CentreforFusion,SpaceandAstrophysics,DepartmentofPhysics,UniversityofWarwick,Coventry,CV47AL,UK
ABSTRACT
Recent hydrodynamical simulations of convection in a solar-like model suggest that penetrative convective flows at the boundary
oftheconvectiveenvelopemodifythethermalbackgroundintheovershootinglayer.Basedontheseresults,weimplementinone-
dimensional stellar evolution codes a simple prescription to modify the temperature gradient below the convective boundary of a
solar model. This simple prescription qualitatively reproduces the behaviour found in the hydrodynamical simulations, namely a
localheatingandsmoothingofthetemperaturegradientbelowtheconvectiveboundary.Weshowthatintroducinglocalheatingin
theovershootinglayercanreducethesound-speeddiscrepancyusuallyreportedbetweensolarmodelsandthestructureoftheSun
inferred from helioseismology. It also affects key quantities in the convective envelope, such as the density, the entropy, and the
speedofsound.Theseeffectscouldhelpreducethediscrepanciesbetweensolarmodelsandobservedconstraintsbasedonseismic
inversions of the Ledoux discriminant. Since mixing due to overshooting and local heating are the result of the same convective
penetrationprocess,thegoalofthisworkistoinvitesolarmodellerstoconsiderbothprocessesforamoreconsistentapproach.
Keywords.Convection–Hydrodynamics–Stars:evolution–Sun:evolution-helioseismology-interior
1. Introduction
Modelling the internal structure of the Sun is still a challenge.
A recent review by Christensen-Dalsgaard (2021) describes in
detailthelong-standingeffortstoimprovesolarmodels.Theso-
lar modelling problem refers to the discrepancy between helio-
seismology and solar interior models that adopt low metallici-
tiespredictedbythethree-dimensional(3D)atmospheremodels
of,forexample,Asplundetal.(2009)andCaffauetal.(2011),
in contrast to the high metallicities based on previous litera-
ture compilations by, for example, Anders & Grevesse (1989)
and Grevesse & Noels (1993). Asplund et al. (2021) have re-
cently confirmed with state-of-the-art 3D simulations the rela-
tively low metal abundances for the Sun. Asplund et al. (2021)
consider that their study yields the most reliable solar abun-
dancesavailabletoday,suggestingthatthesolarmodellingprob-
lemisnolongeraproblemofabundancesbutratheraproblem
ofstellarphysics.Thetreatmentofmixingbelowtheconvective
zoneisoneofthekeyprocessesthatcouldimprovesolarmod-
els.Severalstudiesindeedrevealthattheprocessofconvective
penetration, also called overshooting, at the bottom of the con-
vectiveenvelopecouldplayanimportantroleinimprovingthe
agreement between solar models and helioseismic constraints
(seeforexampleChristensen-Dalsgaardetal.2011;Zhangetal.
2012; Buldgen et al. 2019b). Overshooting in solar models has
mostoftenbeentreatedusingdiffusiveorinstantaneouschemi-
calmixing.Atemperaturegradientthatsharplytransitionsfrom
a nearly adiabatic form to a radiative form is usually assumed,
as suggested by the theoretical work of Zahn (1991). Models
with a smoother transition have also been investigated. Based
on the analysis of models with different stratifications near the
Sendoffprintrequeststo:I.Baraffe
baseoftheconvectivezone,Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2011)
found that models that better fit the helioseismic data have a
weakly sub-adiabatic temperature gradient in the lower part of
theconvectivezoneandasmoothtransitiontotheradiativegra-
dientintheovershootinglayer.ButChristensen-Dalsgaardetal.
(2011)notedthattherequiredtemperaturestratificationisdiffi-
culttoreconcilewithexistingovershootingmodelsandnumer-
ical simulations. They concluded that only non-local turbulent
convectionmodelscouldproducethedesireddegreeofsmooth-
nessinthetransition(seeforexampleZhang&Li2012;Zhang
et al. 2012). But these non-local models remain uncertain, and
their description of overshooting under the conditions found at
the base of the solar convective zone is yet to be validated.
Zhang et al. (2019) explored the impact of overshooting by
introducing a parametrised turbulent kinetic energy flux based
on a model with parameters that are adjusted to improve the
helioseismic properties. They suggest that amelioration can be
obtained specifically below the convective envelope. However,
Zhangetal.(2019)findthatthismodelcannotsolvethewhole
solarproblembecausesuchafluxworsensthesound-speedpro-
fileinthedeepradiativeinterioroftheirsolarmodel.Giventhe
uncertaintiesregardingthetemperaturestratificationoftheover-
shootingregion,solarmodellershaveconsideredtheseeffectsas
secondaryandhavefocusedtheireffortsonexploringtheimpact
ofsolarabundances,microphysics(opacities,equationsofstate,
nuclear reaction rates), and chemical mixing and diffusion (see
details and references in the review of Buldgen et al. 2019a).
Additional, more exotic effects such as early disk accretion or
solar-wind mass loss (Zhang et al. 2019; Kunitomo & Guillot
2021)arealsoattractingincreasingattention.
To reinvigorate the debate, Buldgen et al. (2019b) recently
highlightedonceagainhowthetransitionofthetemperaturegra-
1
a
r
X i
v
:
2
2
0
1
.
0
0
2
0
0
v
1
[
a
s
t
r
o
-
p
h
.
S
R
]
1
J
a
n
2
0
2
2
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
dientjustbelowtheconvectiveenvelopecansignificantlyimpact
the disagreement between solar models and helioseismic con-
straints. Their results, based on a method that combines multi-
ple structural inversions, suggest that the transition in temper-
ature gradient is improperly reproduced by adopting either an
adiabatic or a radiative temperature gradient in the overshoot-
ing layer. The solution should be somewhere in between these
twoextremes.Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2018)alsonotethat
an increase in the temperature at the transition would remove
aremainingsmallsharpdipinthespeedofsoundimmediately
beneaththeconvectivezoneofthemodel.Amajordifficultyis
todisentangletheeffectsofovershootfromtheeffectsofopaci-
ties,whichcanalsoalterthetemperaturegradientintheselayers.
Giventhelargenumberofparameterstodealwithinordertoim-
prove solar models and the current lack of strong arguments in
favour of modifying the thermal stratification in the overshoot-
inglayer,therehasbeennorealmotivationtodeviatefromthe
traditional picture of a sharp transition as formalised by Zahn
(1991).
Thepresentworkismotivatedbyargumentsinspiredbyhy-
drodynamicalsimulationsofconvectionandconvectivepenetra-
tioninsolar-likemodels.Recenthydrodynamicalsimulationsby
Baraffeetal.(2021,hereafterB21)highlighttheprocessoflocal
heatingintheovershootingregionduetopenetratingconvective
motions across the convective boundary. In the following, we
analyse thepotential impact ofthis feature on one-dimensional
(1D) stellar evolution structures in the context of solar models.
The hydrodynamical results of B21 are briefly summarised in
Sect. 2, and their impact on 1D models are analysed in Sect. 3
anddiscussedinSect.4.
2. Modificationofthethermalbackgroundinthe
overshootinglayer:Resultsfrom
two-dimensionalhydrodynamicalsimulations
B21 performed two-dimensional (2D) fully compressible time-
implicitsimulationsofconvectionandconvectivepenetrationin
a solar-like model with the MUlti-dimensional Stellar Implicit
Code MUSIC (Viallet et al. 2011, 2016; Goffrey et al. 2017).
The main motivation was to explore the impact of an artificial
increaseinthestellarluminosityonthepropertiesofconvection
and convective penetration. This procedure is a common tactic
adopted in hydrodynamical simulations of convection (Rogers
etal.2006;Meakin&Arnett2007;Brunetal.2011;Hotta2017;
Edelmannetal.2019).TheexperimentsofB21highlighttheim-
pactofpenetrativedownflowsonthelocalthermalbackground
intheovershootinglayer.Theyillustratehowconvectivedown-
flows,whenpenetratingtheregionbelowtheconvectivebound-
aryoftheenvelope,caninducealocalheatingandamodification
ofthetemperaturegradientasaresultofcompressionandshear
in the overshooting layer. This modification of the local back-
ground is connected to a local increase in the radiative flux to
counterbalancethenegativeenthalpyflux(orheatflux)produced
by penetrating flows. The negative peak of the enthalpy flux
andthepositivebumpoftheradiativefluxbelowtheconvective
boundary are well-known features described in many numeri-
calworks(Hurlburtetal.1986;Muthsametal.1995;Brummell
et al. 2002; Brun et al. 2011; Hotta 2017; K¨ apyl¨ a 2019; Cai
2020).Afewworks(Rogersetal.2006;Vialletetal.2013;Korre
et al. 2019; Higl et al. 2021) have also reported a modification
ofthelocalthermalbackgroundintheovershootingregion,but
withoutprovidingadetaileddescription.ThesimulationsofB21
provideaphysicalexplanationthatlinkstheconvectivepenetra-
tionprocesstothelocalheatingandtotheradiativebumpinthe
overshootinglayer.Thesolar-likestarsimulatedinB21isbased
on a model that is not thermally relaxed. It is reasonable to as-
sumethatthelocalheatingseeninB21ispresentinstarsbecause
thenegativeheatfluxintheovershootinglayerandthebumpin
theradiativefluxthatcompensatesforthisfeaturearepersistent.
Thesetwofeaturesarealsocommonlyobservedinotherhydro-
dynamical simulations, as mentioned above. An exploration of
theimpactofthisheatingonstellarevolutionmodelsmayreveal
thatheatingisanecessaryaspectofmodelsforovershooting.
Fig.1. Radial profile of the temperature departure ∆T/T 0 from
theinitialprofileT 0 andofthesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇ ad )closeto
theconvectiveboundarypredictedby2Dhydrodynamicalsimu-
lations(B21)ofsolar-likemodels.Thelowerpanelcorresponds
to the model with a realistic stellar luminosity and the upper
panel to a model with luminosity enhanced by a factor of ten.
The dash-dotted red lines show ∆T/T 0 (in %), the relative dif-
ferencebetweenthetimeandspaceaveragesofthetemperature,
T,andtheinitialtemperature,T 0 .Thesolidbluelinesshowthe
time and space averages of the sub-adiabaticity (∇−∇ ad ). The
dashedblacklinesshowtheinitialprofileofthesub-adiabaticity,
(∇−∇ ad ) init .Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbythevertical
solidline(seedetailsinB21)
The behaviour of the thermal profile below the convective
boundary found in the simulations of B21 is illustrated in Fig.
1.Itisdisplayedforthemodelwitharealisticstellarluminosity
(lowerpanel).Wealsoshowtheresultsforamodelwithanartifi-
cialenhancementintheluminositybyafactoroftenbecausethe
featuresareintensifiedinthese‘boosted’models(upperpanel).
Thefigureshowsthelocalheatingintheovershootinglayerand
itsimpactonthesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇
ad
),with∇ = dlogT
dlogP
the
2
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
temperature gradient and ∇
ad
= dlogT
dlogP
|
S
the adiabatic gradient.
Theinitialstratificationbelowtheconvectiveboundary(located
at r = 0.6734 × R
star
for this specific stellar model) is set by
thestableradiativegradient,∇
rad
(seethedashedblacklinebe-
lowtheconvectiveboundaryinFig.1).B21showthat,asare-
sultofthelocalheatingbelowtheconvectiveboundarycharac-
terisedbythebumpintemperaturedifference∆T/T 0 displayed
in Fig. 1, the temperature gradient becomes less sub-adiabatic
immediately below the convective boundary1. The net result is
a smoother transition just below the convective boundary with
a temperature gradient that has an intermediate value between
the radiative temperature gradient and the adiabatic one. In the
next section we analyse the impact of this local heating on 1D
solar structures by adopting a simple prescription that mimics
the behaviour of the temperature gradient suggested by hydro-
dynamicalsimulations.
3. Impactonone-dimensionalsolarstructure
models
3.1. Helioseismicconstraints
Ourprimarygoalinthisshortpaperistoillustratethepotential,
qualitative impact of the local heating produced by overshoot-
ing. We adopted a strategy inspired by the analysis of Buldgen
et al. (2020), who constructed a static structure of the Sun in
agreement with seismic inversions of the Ledoux discriminant
definedby
A=
1
Γ
1
dlnP
dlnr
−
dlnρ
dlnr
, (1)
with Γ
1
= (∂lnP/∂lnρ)
ad
. Starting from a reference evolu-
tionary model, Buldgen et al. (2020) used an inversion pro-
cedure to iteratively reconstruct a solar model. Successive in-
versions of the Ledoux discriminant allowed them to obtain a
model-independentprofileforthisquantity.Theirreconstruction
method also gives solar structures that are in excellent agree-
mentwithotherstructuralinversions,namelytheentropy,S,the
squareofthespeedofsound,c2
s
,andthedensity,ρ.Toillustrate
the convergence of their reconstruction procedure, they show
(rightpanelsoftheirFigs.3-6)thesuccessiveiterationsthatcon-
verge to an excellent level of agreement for the four structural
inversions(A,S,c2
s
,ρ)startingfromtheinitialreferencemodel
adoptedintheirwork.Thedifferencesfoundbetweentherecon-
structedmodelandthereferencemodelareusefulastheyindi-
catethemodificationsofthereferencemodelthatarerequiredto
convergetowardsasolarmodelinagreementwithhelioseismic
data. We recall here the major trends found by Buldgen et al.
(2020)forthefourstructuralquantities,whichareusedforour
analysisinSect.3.2.
The first concerns the Ledoux discriminant. The major dis-
crepancy between the Sun and the reference model occurs just
below the convective boundary, with a large positive bump for
thequantity(A
Sun
-A
ref
).
Thesecondconcernsthespeedofsound.Thesamepositive
bumpatthesamelocationasfortheLedouxdiscriminant,A,is
observed for the quantity (c2
s,Sun
− c2
s,ref
)/c2
s,ref
. The corrections
appliedtoAduringthereconstructionprocedurealsoreducethe
discrepancyinthespeedofsoundintheradiativeregion.
Thethirdconcernstheentropy.Largediscrepanciesareob-
servedinboththeradiativeregionandtheconvectivezone.The
1 Lesssub-adiabaticmeansthat|∇−∇
ad
|decreasescomparedtothe
initialprofile.
entropydiscrepancy(S
Sun
−S
ref
)/S
ref
hastwopositivepeaksin
theradiativezone,onejustbelowtheovershootingregionanda
larger peak deeper at ∼ 40% of the stellar radius. This discrep-
ancyisnegativeintheconvectivezone.Thecorrectionsapplied
toAhelpreducetheseentropydiscrepanciesinbothregions.
The fourth concerns the density. The quantity (ρ Sun −
ρ ref )/ρ ref has a negative peak in the radiative region, at ∼ 35%
ofthestellarradius,andispositiveintheconvectivezone.
Importantly,Buldgenetal.(2020)mentionthattheirrecon-
struction procedure gives similar Ledoux discriminant profiles
for a wide range of initial reference models. We used these re-
sults to gauge whether the modifications of the thermal profile
predicted by B21 can help in qualitatively improving all the
structuralquantitiesusedbyBuldgenetal.(2020).
3.2. Testingone-dimensionalsolarmodels
Ourmainmotivationistoshowthepotentialimpactofthelocal
heating described in Sect. 2 on stellar models. We are not aim-
inginthisshortworkatconstructingthebestsolarmodeltofit
helioseismicconstraints.Usingstellarevolutioncodes,wehave
adopted two different methods that can be found in the litera-
turetoconstructsolarmodels(e.g.Zhangetal.2012;Vinyoles
et al. 2017). Our first method relies on the thermal relaxation
of a reference model with solar radius and luminosity that is
modifiedtoreproducethetemperaturegradientintheovershoot-
inglayersuggestedbyhydrodynamicalsimulations.Inthiscase,
thechemicalabundancesarenotmodifiedbynuclearreactions,
mixing, or microscopic diffusion during the relaxation process.
For these tests, we used the 1D Lyon stellar evolution code
(Baraffeetal.1998).Werepeatedthisexperimentbasedonther-
mal relaxation with the stellar evolution code MONSTAR (e.g.
Constantino et al. 2014) and obtained the same qualitative re-
sults.
The second method considers models that account for the
modification of the temperature gradient in the overshooting
layer from the zero age main sequence (ZAMS). The models
arethenevolveduntiltheyreachthesolarradiusandluminosity.
With this approach, changes in the chemical abundances from
nuclearreactions,microscopicdiffusion,andovershootingmix-
ing are also consistent with any modification of the structure
induced by the forced local heating in the overshooting layer.
These tests were performed with MONSTAR as it includes the
treatmentofmicroscopicdiffusion.
The first method allows the impact of local heating in
the overshooting layer after thermal relaxation to be isolated.
The second method provides evolutionary models that are self-
consistentsincetheeffectofthemodificationofthetemperature
gradientisaccountedforduringtheirevolutiononthemainse-
quence.
Inthefollowing,weadoptamodificationofthelocaltemper-
aturegradientintheovershootinglayerthatqualitativelyrepro-
ducesthebehaviourdisplayedinFig.1.Wedefineanovershoot-
inglengthd
ov
= α
ov
H
P,CB
,with H
P,CB
thepressurescaleheight
attheconvectiveboundaryandα
ov
afreeparameter.Wealsode-
finetworadiallocations,r
ov
=r
CB
−d
ov
andr
mid
=r
CB
−d
ov
/2,
withr CB theradiallocationoftheconvectiveboundary.Thetem-
peraturegradientismodifiedasfollows.Forr
mid
≤ r < r
CB
,we
use
∇=g(r)∇
ad
+(1−g(r))∇
rad
, (2)
with
g(r)= sin{[(r−r
mid
)/(r
CB
−r
mid
)]a×π/2}. (3)
3
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
Forr
ov
≤r<r
mid
,weuse
∇=∇
rad
−h(r)∇
ad
, (4)
with
h(r)=b×sin{[(r
mid
−r)/(r
mid
−r
ov
)]×π}. (5)
Sine functions are used in Eqs. (3) and (5) to reproduce the
smoothvariationsinthetemperaturegradientbelowtheconvec-
tiveboundaryproducedbythehydrodynamicalsimulations.We
haveverifiedthattheresultsareinsensitivetothesmoothnessof
these variations and to the exact shape of the temperature gra-
dientradialprofile.Weadopteda=0.3inEq.(3)asitprovidesa
behaviourforthetemperaturegradientveryclosetotheonedis-
playedinFig.1.Resultsareratherinsensitivetovariationsinthe
valuesofabetween0.2and0.4.Weadoptedb=0.03inEq.(5),
whichalsoprovidesaclosevisualmatchtothehydrodynamical
results,butwenotethattheresultsareinsensitivetothevalueof
b.
3.2.1. Thermalequilibriummodels
Thedetailsoftheprocedureforthefirstmethodarethefollow-
ing.Wecalculatetheevolutionofa1 M
(cid:12)
modelwithaninitial
helium mass fraction of 0.28, metallicity Z = 0.02, and a mix-
ing length l
mix
= 1.9H
P
. We use a reference model that is in
thermal equilibrium2 and has the luminosity and radius of the
current Sun. Starting from this reference model, the tempera-
ture gradient is modified over a prescribed depth to mimic the
impact of overshooting according to the hydrodynamical sim-
ulations described in Sect. 2. We adopt the prescription given
byEqs.(2)-(5)overadistanced
ov
belowtheconvectivebound-
ary.WeshowtheresultsinFig.2forα
ov
=0.15andα
ov
=0.20.
Theseovershootingwidthsareingoodagreementwiththemaxi-
maldepthreachedbydownflowsbelowtheconvectiveboundary
predicted by the hydrodynamical simulations for the solar-like
model investigated in B21. We note that the stellar model used
inB21isslightlyunder-luminouscomparedtotheSun(seeB21
fordetails).B21alsomentionthatoneshouldbecautiouswhen
directlyapplyingtheovershootingdepthspredictedbytheirsim-
ulationstorealstarssincethefinalrelaxedstateforthesesimula-
tions may have different properties from non-thermally relaxed
states. We varied α
ov
between 0.15 and 0.35 and find that the
results do not change qualitatively. However, the amplitude of
the variations in the model properties depends on d
ov
(see be-
low).Asshownbelow,thissimpleprescriptionimplementedin
a stellar evolution code yields a local increase in the tempera-
ture below the convective boundary, similar to that observed in
thehydrodynamicalsimulations.WestressthatEqs.(2)-(5)have
beenchosenforsimplicity.Theyareonlyaroughapproximation
thatcanmimicthethermalprofilebehavioursuggestedinthe2D
simulations.
Themodelwithamodifiedtemperaturegradientisthenther-
mally relaxed, that is to say, it is evolved over many thermal
timescaleswithoutanymodificationoftheabundancesfromnu-
clearreactionsuntilthermalequilibriumisreached.Thetemper-
ature gradient is modified in the overshooting layer during the
wholerelaxationprocess,andthisisreferredtoasa‘forcedlocal
heating’.Thisprocedureensuresthatthemodelwithamodified
temperaturegradientcanbeconsistentlycomparedtotherefer-
ence model. As shown in Fig. 2, the simple prescription given
2 Thermalequilibriummeansthatthetotalnuclearenergyproduced
inthecentralregionsbalancestheradiativelossesatthesurface,i.e.the
totalnuclearluminosity,L
nuc
,equalsthetotalstellarluminosity,L.
byEqs.(2)-(5)yieldssimilarqualitativechangesinthetemper-
ature and the sub-adiabaticity close to the convective boundary
thatwasfoundinthehydrodynamicalsimulationsofB21.
Fig.2. Radial profile of the temperature difference and of the
sub-adiabaticityofa1Dsolar-likestructurewithamodifiedtem-
perature gradient in the overshooting layer according to Eqs.
(2)-(5). The temperature gradient is modified over a distance
d
ov
= α
ov
H
P,CB
,withα
ov
=0.15inthelowerpanelandα
ov
=0.20
intheupperpanel.Thedash-dottedredlinesshowthepercent-
agerelativetemperaturedifference,∆T/T
ref
,with∆T =T−T
ref
.
Thesolidbluelinescorrespondtothesub-adiabaticity(∇−∇
ad
).
The dashed black lines show the sub-adiabaticity of the refer-
encemodel.Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbythevertical
solidline.Theverticaldashedlineineachpanelislocatedata
distanced
ov
belowtheconvectiveboundary.
Theimpactonthewholestellarstructurewasquantifiedby
comparingthefourstructuralquantities(A,S,c2
s
,ρ)betweenthe
modified and the reference model. The results are displayed in
Fig.3,with∆Xdefinedas(X−X
ref
)foranystructuralquantityX.
Theforcedlocalheatingintheovershootinglayerproducessim-
ilarpositivepeaksfor∆A,∆S,and∆c2
s
,asfoundforthetemper-
ature.Themodificationthusprovidesthecorrectionrequiredto
improvethediscrepancyfortheLedouxdiscriminantdescribed
in the first of the trends outlined in Sect. 3.1. Unsurprisingly,
such a modification of the temperature gradient is expected to
improve the agreement with helioseismic constraints and help
4
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
remove the sound speed anomaly below the convective bound-
ary (second trend in Sect. 3.1), as suggested by the results of
Christensen-Dalsgaardetal.(2011).Butitisalsointerestingto
notethatsuchamodificationyieldsaslightcoolingofthecon-
vective zone (see Fig. 2) and thus a negative difference for the
entropy(seeFig.3).Anegativedifferenceintheconvectiveen-
velope is in agreement with the correction required for the ref-
erence model of Buldgen et al. (2020) to better match the Sun
(seethirdtrendinSect.3.1).Regardingthedensity,themodifi-
cation of the temperature gradient has an interesting impact in
theradiativezone,withalargedecreaseinthedensitycompared
tothereferencemodeloverabroadregionbelowtheconvective
boundary.Theimpactonthedensityintheconvectiveregionfor
thisspecificmodelispartlyinagreementwiththecorrectionre-
quiredforthisquantityintheBuldgenetal.(2020)study,witha
positivedifferencefoundonlyintheupperpartoftheconvective
envelope(seethefourthtrendinSect.3.1).
Thesetrendsareinsensitivetothedepthoverwhichthetem-
peraturegradientismodified.Increasingthedepthincreasesthe
magnitudeofthedifferencesbuthasnoimpactontheirsign. We
findthatthemaximumvariationinthemodelproperties,suchas
thespeedofsound,∆c2
s
/c2
s,ref
,roughlyscaleswithd2
ov
.Thisscal-
ingislinkedtotheintegratedareabetweenthemodifiedtemper-
aturegradientcurveandtheoneforthereference(non-modified)
temperature gradient, which roughly decreases linearly with r.
Thisareaisproportionaltothesquareoftheovershootingdepth,
and consequently, the maximum variation in the model proper-
tiesisalsoproportionaltod2
ov
.Thequalitativetrendsalsoremain
the same whether overshooting mixing in the reference model
isignoredorincludedusingastepfunction(withinstantaneous
mixing)oranexponentialdecayforthediffusioncoefficient(e.g.
Freytagetal.1996).
3.2.2. Self-consistentevolutionarymodels
For the tests based on the second method, we ran different sets
ofmodelswithdifferentcombinationsofassumptions,including
or not microscopic diffusion and with or without overshooting
mixing. When overshooting mixing was included in the over-
shooting layer, it was based either on a step function or on an
exponentialdecayforthediffusioncoefficient.Microscopicdif-
fusionforHandHewasimplementedaccordingtoThouletal.
(1994). For these tests, the temperature gradient was modified
accordingto Eqs.(2)-(5).AllmodelsstartfromtheZAMSand
areevolveduntiltheyreachthesolarradiusandluminosityatthe
sameage.Thiswasachievedbymakingsmalladjustmentstothe
mixinglength,l
mix
.Themodelswithtemperaturegradientmod-
ificationswerecomparedtotherelevantreferencemodel,which
has no modification of the temperature gradient but everything
else is the same (i.e. the same treatment of microscopic diffu-
sionandofovershootingmixing).Theevolutionarymodelswith
temperaturegradientmodificationsarethusself-consistent.The
maindifferencebetweenthisapproachandtheoneintheprevi-
oussectionisthatthesemodelsaccumulatesmalldifferencesin,
for example, central H abundance when compared to their ref-
erence model. These tests produce the same trends in the over-
shooting layer as found for the tests based on the first method
(Sect. 3.2.1), independently of the treatment of overshooting
mixing and whether microscopic diffusion is included or not.
Intheconvectivezone,allmodelsgiveapositivedifferencefor
thedensitybetweenthemodelwithamodifiedtemperaturegra-
dient and the relevant reference model. For the other quantities
(S,c2
s
),thedifferencesintheconvectivezoneareverysensitive
Fig.3. Difference of various structural quantities between a
model with a modified temperature gradient in the overshoot-
inglayerandareferencemodelcalculatedwiththeLyonstellar
evolutioncode.Thetemperaturegradientinthemodifiedmodel
is changed over a distance d ov = α ov H P,CB below the convec-
tive boundary (indicated by the vertical solid line). The lower
panel shows the results for α
ov
= 0.15 and the upper panel for
α
ov
=0.20.
totheassumptionsregardingwhetherovershootingmixingisin-
cludedornot.Butatleastwefindsolutionsthatarecompatible
withthefourtrendsfoundbyBuldgenetal.(2020)forthefour
structural quantities. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 with a model
that accounts for step function overshooting mixing over a dis-
tanced
ov
=0.15H
P,CB
(lowerpanel)andd
ov
=0.20H
P,CB
(upper
panel).
4. Conclusion
The tests performed in Sect. 3 are based on different methods
(relaxedmodelsversusconsistentevolution)thatcanbeusedto
construct solar models. Independently of the method used, the
tests show that a local increase in the temperature in the over-
shootingregionduetoconvectivepenetrationprovidesthequali-
tativeeffectsrequiredtoimprovethespeedofsounddiscrepancy
belowtheconvectiveboundary.Thisdiscrepancyispersistentin
5
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
Fig.4. Difference of various structural quantities between a
modified model and a reference model calculated with the
MONSTAR stellar evolution code. The reference model is
evolved from the ZAMS with microscopic diffusion and step
functionovershootingmixingoveradistanced
ov
=α
ov
H
P,CB
be-
lowtheconvectiveboundary.Thelowerpanelshowstheresults
forα
ov
= 0.15andtheupperpanelforα
ov
= 0.20.Themodels
with a modified temperature gradient in the overshooting layer
(samemicroscopicdiffusionandovershootingmixingtreatment
as the reference model) are evolved similarly from the ZAMS.
Theconvectiveboundaryisindicatedbytheverticalsolidline.
solar models that use low solar metal abundances. This is not
surprising because an increase in the temperature in this spe-
cificregionhaspreviouslybeeninvokedintheliteraturetosolve
this problem, as mentioned in Sect. 1. However, the details of
thephysicalprocessresponsibleforthislocalheatinghavebeen
lacking, whereas we can now suggest an explanation based on
the B21 results. The trends that we find for the four structural
quantities (A, S, c2
s
, ρ) are robust below the convective bound-
aryandinalargefractionoftheradiativecore,independentlyof
thetreatmentofmixinganddiffusionandofthemethodforcon-
structingthemodelsinSects.3.2.1and3.2.2.Ourexperiments
additionally show that such a local change in the temperature,
despitebeingmadeoveraverylimitedregionbelowtheconvec-
tive boundary, can also affect the density, the entropy, and the
speed of sound in the convective envelope after thermal relax-
ation or evolution on the main sequence. How these quantities
areaffectedintheconvectiveenvelopecomparedtoareference
modelwithnolocalheatingdependsonthestrategyforbuilding
solarmodelsandonthetreatmentofovershootingmixing.This
mixing is obviously linked to the local heating given that both
resultfromthesamedynamicalprocess.Acombinedtestingof
botheffectsinstellarmodelscouldprovidemoreconstraintson
thegeneralprocessofovershooting.
Increasingly, efforts are now devoted to characterising the
process of convective boundary mixing in stellar models based
on multi-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations. More work
isrequiredtoobtainreliabledeterminationsofanovershooting
depth and to describe quantitatively the mixing and impact on
the temperature gradient. Understanding the effects of rotation
andmagneticfieldsonovershootingisasignificantlymoredif-
ficult theoretical and numerical problem to address; however,
efforts to study these combined non-linear effects are ongoing
(Hotta 2017; Korre et al. 2021). Despite the limitations of ex-
isting hydrodynamical simulations, they are already providing
constraints on physical processes usually treated with several
free parameters in 1D stellar evolution models. They can thus
limit the degrees of freedom in a problem as complex as so-
larmodelling.Ourprimarygoalinthisworkistohighlightthe
potentialimpactofconvectivepenetrationonthethermalback-
groundintheovershootingregion.TheprocessesstudiedinB21
thatproducealocalchangeinthetemperaturegradientarealso
responsibleforthemixinginthisregion.Becausemuchobserva-
tionalevidencepointstowardstheneedforextramixingatcon-
vective boundaries, for example lithium depletion in solar-like
stars (Baraffe et al. 2017), the size of convective cores (Claret
& Torres 2016), and colour-magnitude diagrams (Castro et al.
2014), solar modellers often include this extra mixing in their
models.Butaconsistentapproachshouldalsorequireaccount-
ingforalocalchangeinthetemperaturegradient.Theimpactof
thislocalheatinggoesintherightdirectiontoimprovenotonly
the discrepancies of solar models below the convective bound-
ary,butalsointheconvectiveenvelope.Thiseffectoffersanin-
teresting step forward for solving the solar modelling problem.
Inthisexploratorywork,weadoptasimpleprescriptionforthe
local heating in the overshooting layer since the main goal is
to highlight its qualitative impact on stellar models. However,
thiseffectshouldnotbeconsideredasanotherfreeparameterin
the solar modelling problem. Future multi-dimensional hydro-
dynamicalsimulationswillenablethisprocess,anditstreatment
in1Dstellarevolutioncodes,tobebetterconstrained.
5. Acknowledgements
Wethankouranonymousrefereeforvaluablecommentswhich
helpedimprovingthemanuscript.Thisworkissupportedbythe
ERC grant No. 787361-COBOM and the consolidated STFC
grant ST/R000395/1. IB thanks the Max Planck Institut f¨ ur
Astrophysics(Garching)forwarmhospitalityduringcompletion
ofpartofthiswork.Theauthorswouldliketoacknowledgethe
use of the University of Exeter High-Performance Computing
(HPC) facility ISCA and of the DiRAC Data Intensive service
atLeicester,operatedbytheUniversityofLeicesterITServices,
whichformspartoftheSTFCDiRACHPCFacility.Theequip-
ment was funded by BEIS capital funding via STFC capital
grants ST/K000373/1 and ST/R002363/1 and STFC DiRAC
OperationsgrantST/R001014/1.DiRACispartoftheNational
e-Infrastructure.
6
Baraffeetal.:Localheatingduetoconvectiveovershootingandthesolarmodellingproblem
References
Anders,E.&Grevesse,N.1989,Geochim.Cosmochim.Acta,53,197
Asplund,M.,Amarsi,A.M.,&Grevesse,N.2021,A&A,653,A141
Asplund,M.,Grevesse,N.,Sauval,A.J.,&Scott,P.2009,ARA&A,47,481
Baraffe,I.,Chabrier,G.,Allard,F.,&Hauschildt,P.H.1998,A&A,337,403
Baraffe,I.,Pratt,J.,Goffrey,T.,etal.2017,ApJ,845,L6
Baraffe,I.,Pratt,J.,Vlaykov,D.G.,etal.2021,A&A,654,A126
Brummell,N.H.,Clune,T.L.,&Toomre,J.2002,ApJ,570,825
Brun,A.S.,Miesch,M.S.,&Toomre,J.2011,ApJ,742,79
Buldgen,G.,Eggenberger,P.,Baturin,V.A.,etal.2020,A&A,642,A36
Buldgen,G.,Salmon,S.,&Noels,A.2019a,FrontiersinAstronomyandSpace
Sciences,6,42
Buldgen,G.,Salmon,S.J.A.J.,Noels,A.,etal.2019b,A&A,621,A33
Caffau, E., Ludwig, H. G., Steffen, M., Freytag, B., & Bonifacio, P. 2011,
Sol.Phys.,268,255
Cai,T.2020,ApJ,888,46
Castro,N.,Fossati,L.,Langer,N.,etal.2014,A&A,570,L13
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2021,LivingReviewsinSolarPhysics,18,2
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.,Gough,D.O.,&Knudstrup,E.2018,MNRAS,477,
3845
Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.,Monteiro,M.J.P.F.G.,Rempel,M.,&Thompson,
M.J.2011,MNRAS,414,1158
Claret,A.&Torres,G.2016,A&A,592,A15
Constantino,T.,Campbell,S.,Gil-Pons,P.,&Lattanzio,J.2014,ApJ,784,56
Edelmann,P.V.F.,Ratnasingam,R.P.,Pedersen,M.G.,etal.2019,ApJ,876,4
Freytag,B.,Ludwig,H.G.,&Steffen,M.1996,A&A,313,497
Goffrey,T.,Pratt,J.,Viallet,M.,etal.2017,A&A,600,A7
Grevesse,N.&Noels,A.1993,inOriginandEvolutionoftheElements,ed.
N.Prantzos,E.Vangioni-Flam,&M.Casse,15–25
Higl,J.,M¨ uller,E.,&Weiss,A.2021,A&A,646,A133
Hotta,H.2017,ApJ,843,52
Hurlburt,N.E.,Toomre,J.,&Massaguer,J.M.1986,ApJ,311,563
K¨ apyl¨ a,P.J.2019,A&A,631,A122
Korre,L.,Brummell,N.,Garaud,P.,&Guervilly,C.2021,MNRAS,503,362
Korre,L.,Garaud,P.,&Brummell,N.H.2019,MNRAS,484,1220
Kunitomo,M.&Guillot,T.2021,arXive-prints,arXiv:2109.06492
Meakin,C.A.&Arnett,D.2007,ApJ,667,448
Muthsam,H.J.,Goeb,W.,Kupka,F.,Liebich,W.,&Zoechling,J.1995,A&A,
293,127
Rogers,T.M.,Glatzmaier,G.A.,&Jones,C.A.2006,ApJ,653,765
Thoul,A.A.,Bahcall,J.N.,&Loeb,A.1994,ApJ,421,828
Viallet,M.,Baraffe,I.,&Walder,R.2011,A&A,531,A86
Viallet,M.,Goffrey,T.,Baraffe,I.,etal.2016,A&A,586,A153
Viallet,M.,Meakin,C.,Arnett,D.,&Moc´ ak,M.2013,ApJ,769,1
Vinyoles,N.,Serenelli,A.M.,Villante,F.L.,etal.2017,ApJ,835,202
Zahn,J.P.1991,A&A,252,179
Zhang,C.,Deng,L.,Xiong,D.,&Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2012,ApJ,759,
L14
Zhang,Q.S.&Li,Y.2012,ApJ,746,50
Zhang,Q.-S.,Li,Y.,&Christensen-Dalsgaard,J.2019,ApJ,881,103
7
